>> YES, COMING FROM THE STORE,
YOU KNOW, I WAS ON THE WAY, YOU
KNOW, TO MY GRANDMOTHER'S HOUSE,
YOU KNOW.
>> Reporter: ONE EVENING IN
2010, MUSTAFA WILLIS WAS WALKING
TO VISIT HIS GRANDMOTHER IN
NEWARK, NEW JERSEY, WHEN POLICE
STOPPED HIM ON THE STREET.
>> "PUT YOUR HANDS UP."
I PUT MY HANDS UP.
HE SAID, "DON'T MOVE."
CHECKED ME, PLACED ME UNDER
ARREST.
THE SERGEANT SAID, YOU KNOW,
"TELL ME WHOSE GUN THIS IS, AND
WE'LL LET YOU GO."
AND I SAID, "OFFICER, I DON'T
KNOW NOTHING ABOUT NO GUN.
I'M NOT FROM AROUND HERE."
>> Reporter: HE WAS ARRESTED FOR
HAVING A STOLEN GUN, A CHARGE HE
DENIED.
HE SAYS BAIL WAS SET AT $50,000,
WHICH MEANT HE HAD TO COME UP
WITH $5,000, OR 10%, FOR A BAIL
BOND IN ORDER TO GO FREE.
BUT AT THE TIME, HE WAS MAKING
ONLY ABOUT $1,200 A MONTH AFTER
TAXES AS A TRUCK DRIVER'S
ASSISTANT.
COULD YOU AFFORD TO PAY $5,000
TO GET OUT OF JAIL?
>> NO, MA'AM.
>> Reporter: HOW LONG DID YOU
SIT IN JAIL FOR?
>> THREE MONTHS.
>> Reporter: DURING THOSE THREE
MONTHS, WILLIS LOST HIS JOB,
MISSED THE FUNERAL OF A COUSIN,
AND DEVELOPED HIGH BLOOD
PRESSURE, HE SAYS, FROM THE
STRESS OF BEING IN JAIL.
>> I JUST WANTED TO BE HOME WITH
MY FAMILY.
LIKE, THAT... THAT WAS REALLY
IT.
LIKE, IT WAS JUST HELL FOR ME.
>> Reporter: WILLIS GOT OUT
AFTER THE JUDGE REDUCED HIS
BAIL, AND, EVENTUALLY,
PROSECUTORS DROPPED ALL THE
CHARGES.
BUT WILLIS AND HIS FAMILY STILL
HAD TO PAY BACK THE $3,000 BOND.
>> BAIL WAS ORIGINALLY SET FOR,
I THINK, $200,000 OR $250,000.
>> Reporter: IN 2015, JAMES
LUMFORD SPENT EIGHT MONTHS IN
JAIL IN NEWARK BECAUSE HE
COULDN'T MAKE BAIL AFTER HE SAYS
HE WAS FALSELY ACCUSED OF ARMED
ROBBERY.
>> BEING LOCKED UP INTO THAT
SITUATION, YOU NEVER KNOW WHAT
YOU CAN GET INTO IN THERE.
AN ALTERCATION CAN HAPPEN AT ANY
POINT IN TIME.
>> Reporter: WHILE HE WAS IN
JAIL, HIS PARTNER AND HER
CHILDREN WERE EVICTED FROM THEIR
APARTMENT.
DESPERATE TO GET OUT AND SUPPORT
HIS FAMILY, HE PLED GUILTY TO A
CRIME HE SAYS HE DIDN'T COMMIT.
HE NOW WORKS AS A PLUMBER BUT
SAYS OTHER JOBS MAY BE HARD TO
GET.
>> A DECENT PAYING JOB, I CAN'T
PASS A BACKGROUND CHECK BECAUSE
THAT'S GOING TO POP UP.
>> Reporter: ACROSS NEW JERSEY,
NEARLY 40% OF THE PEOPLE HELD IN
JAIL WERE THERE SIMPLY BECAUSE
THEY COULD NOT AFFORD BAIL,
ACCORDING TO A 2013 STUDY.
ACROSS THE NATION, BLACK AND
LATINO DEFENDANTS ARE OFTEN THE
LEAST ABLE TO PAY.
>> I FOUND PROBABLE CAUSE.
IT'S PROVABLE.
>> Reporter: AT THE SAME TIME,
POTENTIALLY VIOLENT PEOPLE WHO
HAD MONEY EASILY POSTED BAIL AND
WALKED FREE, SAYS NEW JERSEY
SUPERIOR COURT JUDGE ERNEST
CAPOSELA.
BECAUSE THE STATE CONSTITUTION
USED TO REQUIRE BAIL FOR MOST
CASES, CAPOSELA SAYS JUDGES DID
SOMETHING PROBLEMATIC-- SETTING
BAIL EXTREMELY HIGH IN ORDER TO
KEEP SOME DEFENDANTS BEHIND
BARS.
>> SO, YOU KNOW, $500,000 BAIL,
$1 MILLION BAIL.
IF I SET A BAIL ON YOU AND I
KNOW YOU CAN'T MAKE IT, THAT'S
AN EXCESSIVE BAIL.
THAT VIOLATES THE EIGHTH
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION.
IT VIOLATES THE PRESUMPTION OF
INNOCENCE.
IT... IT WASN'T, IN MY OPINION,
AN HONEST, INTELLIGENT SYSTEM.
>> Reporter: IN 2014, SPURRED BY
JUDGES AND CRIMINAL JUSTICE
REFORM ADVOCATES, NEW JERSEY
CHANGED ITS PRETRIAL JUSTICE
SYSTEM IN TWO WAYS.
ONE, VOTERS APPROVED AN
AMENDMENT TO THE STATE
CONSTITUTION GIVING JUDGES THE
POWER TO DETAIN WITHOUT BAIL
ANYONE WHO POSES A THREAT OR A
FLIGHT RISK.
TWO, THE NEW JERSEY STATE
LEGISLATURE PASSED A BILL TO
ABOLISH CASH BAIL FOR MOST
NONVIOLENT DEFENDANTS.
IT ALSO SET UP A NEW SYSTEM TO
MONITOR RELEASED DEFENDANTS, AND
REQUIRED PROSECUTORS TO TRY
CASES MORE QUICKLY.
THE BILL PASSED WITH BIPARTISAN
SUPPORT, WAS SIGNED BY
REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR CHRIS
CHRISTIE, A FORMER FEDERAL
PROSECUTOR, AND WENT INTO EFFECT
IN JANUARY.
>> WE NOW HAVE A CRIMINAL
JUSTICE SYSTEM THAT WILL PERMIT
OUR JUDGES TO KEEP THE TRULY
DANGEROUS SOCIOPATH BEHIND BARS,
BUT WILL RELEASE THOSE NON-
VIOLENT OFFENDERS WHO HAVE ONLY
REMAINED IN JAIL BECAUSE THEY
ARE POOR.
>> THIS IS A DETENTION HEARING,
ALL RIGHT?
THEY USED TO BE CALLED A BAIL
HEARING, BUT WE HAVE A NEW
SYSTEM NOW.
>> Reporter: JUDGE CAPOSELA
PRESIDES OVER THE PASSAIC COUNTY
COURT IN PATERSON, NEW JERSEY'S
THIRD-LARGEST CITY.
IT'S A LOW-INCOME AREA WITH ONE
OF THE STATE'S HIGHEST CRIME
RATES.
IN THE NEW SYSTEM CAPOSELA
HELPED DEVISE, JUDGES AND
ATTORNEYS NOW RELY ON A PUBLIC
SAFETY ASSESSMENT, OR P.S.A., TO
PREDICT THE RISK A DEFENDANT
POSES.
A COMPUTER ALGORITHM EVALUATES
NINE RISK FACTORS, LIKE WHETHER
DEFENDANTS HAVE PRIOR VIOLENT
CONVICTIONS OR FAILURES TO
APPEAR IN COURT.
JOHN HARRISON OVERSEES THE NEW
PRETRIAL SERVICES PROGRAM FOR
PASSAIC COUNTY.
>> NOW, IF SOMEONE FAILS TO
APPEAR IN THE LAST TWO YEARS, IT
GOES UP.
>> Reporter: DEFENDANTS RECEIVE
TWO SCORES, FROM ONE TO SIX.
>> SHE RESULTS AS A FIVE, FOUR.
>> Reporter: THE SCORES PREDICT
THE LIKELIHOOD THE DEFENDANT
WILL FAIL TO APPEAR AND COMMIT
NEW CRIMINAL ACTIVITY.
THE LOWER THE SCORES, THE BETTER
THE CHANCE THE P.S.A. WILL
RECOMMEND THE DEFENDANT BE
RELEASED.
>> ALL RISE.
>> Reporter: LATER, WHEN THE
DEFENDANT APPEARS IN COUNTY
COURT-- IN THIS CASE, BY VIDEO
FROM JAIL-- THE JUDGE USES THE
P.S.A. SCORE TO DECIDE HOW
SHE'LL BE MONITORED AFTER
RELEASE.
>> YOU HAVE TO REPORT ONE TIME
PER WEEK TO PRETRIAL SERVICES.
ONCE BY... ONE WEEK BY PHONE,
ONE WEEK IN PERSON.
>> Reporter: IF THERE'S A
SERIOUS CRIME OR A HIGH P.S.A.
SCORE, THE PROSECUTOR CAN FILE A
MOTION TO DETAIN.
THAT TRIGGERS A SECOND HEARING,
HELD WITHIN ABOUT A WEEK.
LAWYERS PRESENT EVIDENCE ARGUING
WHETHER THE DEFENDANT SHOULD BE
JAILED OR LET GO.
>> THERE WAS A PAIR OF SILVER
SCISSORS COVERED WITH WHAT
APPEARED TO BE BLOOD.
>> Reporter: THIS MAN, CHARGED
WITH AGGRAVATED MANSLAUGHTER,
HAD A HIGH P.S.A. SCORE OF FIVE
AND FIVE, AND HE'S FLAGGED AS
BEING PRONE TO VIOLENCE.
>> SO, FOR ALL THOSE REASONS, HE
WILL BE REMAINED DETAINED.
>> Reporter: THIS MAN WAS
ACCUSED OF DRUG POSSESSION AND
HAS A HISTORY OF OTHER CHARGES
AND FAILING TO APPEAR.
HE GOT THE HIGHEST P.S.A. SCORES
POSSIBLE-- SIX AND SIX-- BUT
JUDGE CAPOSELA HAS THE
DISCRETION TO WEIGH OTHER
FACTORS.
>> I'M ALSO SENSITIVE TO THE
FACT THAT HE'S WORKING, AND HE'S
SUPPORTING FOUR CHILDREN.
SO, I'M SATISFIED THAT I'LL
RELEASE HIM ON LEVEL THREE.
CONDITION OF YOUR LEASE,
THOUGH-- AND I VERY RARELY DO
THIS-- YOU HAVE TO BE EMPLOYED,
ALL RIGHT?
WE'RE GOING TO MONITOR YOU NOW.
YOU ALL RIGHT?
ALL RIGHT.
>> Reporter: HE WILL HAVE TO
CHECK IN REGULARLY WITH THE
COURT BEFORE HIS TRIAL, PART OF
THE NEW MONITORING SYSTEM.
>> DON'T LET ME DOWN, MR.
LIGHTY.
>> I WON'T.
>> Reporter: THE MOST HIGH-RISK
DEFENDANTS GET ELECTRONIC
BRACELETS.
DEFENDANTS ALSO RECEIVE PHONE
CALLS, TEXTS AND EMAILS TO
REMIND THEM OF COURT DATES.
BEFORE, UNDER THE OLD SYSTEM,
DID YOU HAVE THE OPTION TO
JUST... TO WAIVE BAIL?
>> THE PROBLEM WITH THAT WAS, WE
DIDN'T HAVE MONITORING BACK
THEN.
SO, NOW, WHEN WE DO IT, THERE'S
A... A GREAT COMFORT LEVEL
BECAUSE WE'RE GOING TO BE
MONITORING THOSE FOLKS.
>> Reporter: SINCE NEW JERSEY
ENDED CASH BAIL, 17,550
DEFENDANTS WERE CHARGED WITH
STATE CRIMES DURING THE FIRST
FIVE MONTHS OF THIS YEAR, ALMOST
THREE QUARTERS WERE RELEASED
WITH MONITORING, CLOSE TO 10%
WERE RELEASED WITH NO
MONITORING, AND 13% WERE
DETAINED IN JAIL.
THE STATE JAIL POPULATION HAS
DROPPED BY 19% SINCE THE START
OF THE YEAR DUE TO BAIL REFORM
AND ALSO THE FACT THAT POLICE
ARE ISSUING MORE SUMMONSES WITH
NO ARREST FOR SOME LOW-LEVEL
CRIMES.
>> I THINK THE NEW SYSTEM IS
WORKING.
>> Reporter: PASSAIC COUNTY
PUBLIC DEFENDER DANIEL PALAZZO
SAYS CASES WERE HARDER TO WIN
WHEN HIS LOW-INCOME CLIENTS SAT
IN JAIL BECAUSE THEY COULDN'T
POST BAIL.
THE NEW, SPEEDY TRIAL
REQUIREMENTS WEREN'T IN PLACE,
AND PROSECUTORS HAD LEVERAGE TO
OBTAIN A GUILTY PLEA.
>> AND THE CASE JUST SITS, AND
IT GETS LONGER AND LONGER AND
LONGER.
AND EVENTUALLY, SOMEBODY SAYS,
"I GIVE UP.
I WANT MY FREEDOM BACK."
>> Reporter: JUST LIKE WHAT
HAPPENED TO JAMES LUMFORD, WHO
PLED GUILTY TO A CRIME HE SAYS
HE DIDN'T COMMIT.
BUT THE NEW "NO BAIL" SYSTEM HAS
VOCAL OPPONENTS.
BAIL BONDSMEN SAY IT'S PUTTING
THEM OUT OF BUSINESS.
AND IN MAY, AFTER COMPLAINTS
FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT, NEW JERSEY
STATE COURTS CHANGED THE P.S.A.
ALGORITHM TO AUTOMATICALLY
RECOMMEND DETENTION FOR AN
EXPANDED LIST OF CRIMES, LIKE
GUN POSSESSION AND FOR
DEFENDANTS WHO RE-OFFEND WHILE
ON RELEASE.
>> I'VE NOT HEARD ONE CHIEF SAY
ANYTHING POSITIVE ABOUT THIS
BAIL REFORM.
>> Reporter: JOSEPH WALKER IS
THE POLICE CHIEF IN RINGWOOD, A
TOWN IN PASSAIC COUNTY.
>> IT TREATS OFFENDERS AS IF
THEY WERE VICTIMS.
THEY HAVE NO CONCERN FOR THE
VICTIMS THAT WE ARE SWORN TO
PROTECT AND SERVE.
>> Reporter: WALKER SAYS POLICE
OFFICERS ARE FRUSTRATED SEEING
SUSPECTS THEY ARREST BACK OUT ON
THE STREETS SO SOON.
>> IT'S A SHAME THAT WE WASTE
TIME ARRESTING PEOPLE OVER AND
OVER AGAIN, AND THEY KEEP ON
RELEASING THEM.
I MEAN, OUR OFFICERS FEEL LIKE
IT'S A SLAP IN THE FACE BECAUSE
THEY'RE WORKING HARD TO DO A
GOOD CASE, WHETHER IT BE DRUGS,
OR CAR BURGLARIES, OR WHATEVER.
THEY GET DOWN THERE, AND THEY
GET RELEASED.
THEN, THEY'RE OUT PROBABLY DOING
IT AGAIN.
>> Reporter: UNDER THE OLD
SYSTEM, THAT PERSON COULD'VE
POSTED BAIL AND ALSO BEEN
RELEASED, RIGHT?
>> YEAH, BUT IF HE WAS RELEASED
AND RE-ARRESTED, THE BAIL THAT
HE WAS RELEASED ON WOULD BE
REVOKED.
SO, THERE'S A MONETARY PENALTY
RIGHT OFF THE BAT.
NOW, THEY DON'T HAVE TO POST
ANYTHING.
THEY DON'T HAVE TO SECURE
THEY JUST WALK FREE.
>> Reporter: WALKER POINTS TO
NEWS REPORTS OF FREED SUSPECTS
COMMITTING CRIMES, LIKE THE CASE
OF A RELEASED MAN WHO ALLEGEDLY
MURDERED HIS GIRLFRIEND BEFORE
COMMITTING SUICIDE.
THE STATE HAS NO DATA YET ON HOW
MANY PEOPLE HAVE COMMITTED
CRIMES WHILE OUT BEFORE TRIAL.
THERE HAVE BEEN INSTANCES OF
PEOPLE WHO'VE GOTTEN OUT UNDER A
BAIL REFORM AND COMMITTED SOME
VERY SERIOUS CRIMES.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Reporter: IS THERE A RISK TO
PUBLIC SAFETY?
>> THE ANSWER IS: NO MORE THAN
THE MONETARY BAIL BECAUSE, ONE,
WE'RE MONITORING THESE FOLKS.
AND WE HOPE THAT THE PUBLIC,
ONCE THEY START TO UNDERSTAND
IT, WILL, YOU KNOW, APPROVE OF
IT AND BECOME ACCEPTING OF IT.
WE DID NOT INSTITUTE CRIMINAL
JUSTICE REFORM TO PUT BAIL
BONDSMEN OUT OF BUSINESS AND TO
CLEAR OUT THE JAILS.
IT WAS TO RESPECT THE
PRESUMPTION OF INNOCENCE, TO
DESIGN, YOU KNOW, A SYSTEM THAT
WAS FAIR AND HONEST.